Engagement acceptance.
 So within the stages of the audit, you have your pre-engagement acceptance activities, then your engagement letter, then your audit strategy and planning, internal control evaluation, substantive procedures, audit completion, report preparation, and communication, then finally your post-audit responsibilities and your quality control.
 This lecture will focus on solely engagement acceptance.
 So for your pre-engagement acceptance activities and your engagement letter, we begin with pre-engagement acceptance activities.
 You receive an appointment.
 You make an assessment of the auditor's capability.
 And the auditor must ensure that they are independent and adhere to all relevant ethical rules of conduct.
 And the auditor should ascertain they have the necessary time and resources to finish the audit, that's important.
 They should ensure that the audit team possesses the skills and their personnel required to complete the engagement effectively.
 So if your audit team is only used to doing banks, should you take on a client that deals exclusively in nuclear reactors?
 The answer is maybe.
 Only take the audit if your team either possesses the skills or will possess the skills at game time, as it were, to do the audit.
 Otherwise, punt.
 Like stick to banks or stick to what you're good at.
 You have to, you gotta know your stuff.
 Then we get an assessment of the client's auditability.
 So how's the integrity and the credibility of the management team looking?
 Looking good, looking shady, don't know.
 Determine whether the financial reporting framework utilized by the client is acceptable and aligned with its own standards.
 The client must acknowledge their responsibility for the financial statements and their own internal control.
 And they should guarantee that the auditor will have access to the financial statement information and any additional information that's required.
 They'll have unrestricted access.
 So if there's any like, eh, red flag.
 Then you have to communicate with the predecessor auditor before accepting the engagement.
 This is mandatory.
 It's not optional.
 It's not, eh, that's a best practice.
 It's mandatory.
 So those communications would be as follows.
 First, you have to seek permission from the client.
 If they don't give you permission, not only is it a red flag, you gotta punt.
 So you have to seek permission and get that permission.
 So once you get permission, then the topics that you discuss.
 Hey, why'd you change?
 Because auditors are in the business of auditing.
 That's how they make their money.
 Why are you no longer engaged with this client?
 Hey, what's the integrity of the management?
 Any past audit disagreements or disputes?
 What were your communications like with the audit committee?
 Any related party or unusual shady-ish transactions?
 Then you have the engagement letter.
 And this is mandatory.
 And the components of the engagement letter are as follows.
 You have the parties to engagements.
 The auditor, the management, and those in charge of governance.
 The audit objectives and scope.
 The management's responsibilities, which are the financial statements and the internal controls.
 Whose financial statements are they?
 They belong to the management.
 Very important.
 Well, and the access that's required and written representations.
 The auditor's responsibilities are to opine on the financial statements.
 To write an opinion.
 And to communicate any significant deficiencies and or material weaknesses in the company's internal controls.
 Next, the limitations of the audit.
 In the form of the audit report.
 And then, finally, fees and other arrangements.
 Fees structure, additional services, and the involvement of specialists or internal auditors that are foreseen.
 Finally, confidentiality.
 Now, so that's for a new engagement.
 What about continuing engagement?
 If the terms of the engagement are unchanged, then it's a best practice to remind the client of the existing terms at the beginning of the audit cycle.
 This can be done written or orally.
 If orally, make sure you document it.
 If the terms of the engagement have changed, then it's essential to put these in writing.
 Like, always put things in writing.
 Even if it's oral, document it.
 Because people's memories have a tendency to get foggy.
 And this could be either a revised engagement letter or an addendum to the original letter.
 What about a client's request for a change in the terms of engagement?
 If it's a reasonable request, so the subsequent report issued on the altered service should not make any reference to the original audit engagement.
 Only the audit procedures or tasks conducted during the original audit.
 But if it's an unreasonable request, then decline any change in the engagement terms.
 In the instance of an unreasonable request, the auditor should withdraw from the engagement, communicate the reasons for withdrawal, and communicate those concerns to those charged with governance.
 And you have an obligation to inform other stakeholders or regulatory bodies about the withdrawal and the reasons.
 This concludes Engagement Acceptance.
 